docs: added tutorial for Cosmoverse 2023 (#4793)
cosmos/ibc-go: docs/tutorials/01-fee/04-wire-feeibc-mod.md

---
title: Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to a Cosmos SDK Blockchain
sidebar_label: Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to a Cosmos SDK Blockchain
sidebar_position: 4
slug: /fee/wire-feeibc-mod
---

import HighlightBox from '@site/src/components/HighlightBox';

# Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to a Cosmos SDK Blockchain

<HighlightBox type="learning" title="Learning Goals">

In this section, you will:

- Add the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to a Cosmos SDK blockchain as a module.
- Wire up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to the IBC transfer stack.

</HighlightBox>

## 1. Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware as a Cosmos SDK Module

> The Fee Middleware is not just an IBC middleware, it is also a Cosmos SDK module since it manages its own state and defines its own messages.

Reviewer: nice to point out 🎉

		// this line is used by starport scaffolding # stargate/app/endBlockers
	)
	app.mm.SetOrderEndBlockers(
		// ... other modules
		vestingtypes.ModuleName,
		consensusparamtypes.ModuleName,
		// plus-diff-line 
+		ibcfeetypes.ModuleName,
		// this line is used by starport scaffolding # stargate/app/endBlockers
	)

	// NOTE: The genutils module must occur after staking so that pools are
	// properly initialized with tokens from genesis accounts.
	// NOTE: Capability module must occur first so that it can initialize any capabilities
	// so that other modules that want to create or claim capabilities afterwards in InitChain
	// can do so safely.
	genesisModuleOrder := []string{
		// ... other modules
		icatypes.ModuleName,
		// plus-diff-line
+		ibcfeetypes.ModuleName,
		evidencetypes.ModuleName,
		// ... other modules
		consensusparamtypes.ModuleName,
		// this line is used by starport scaffolding # stargate/app/initGenesis
	}
	app.mm.SetOrderInitGenesis(genesisModuleOrder...)
	app.mm.SetOrderExportGenesis(genesisModuleOrder...)
```

## 2. Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to the IBC Transfer Stack

### 2.1. Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to the `TransferKeeper`

> The ICS-29 Fee Middleware Keeper implements [`ICS4Wrapper`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/v7.3.0/modules/core/05-port/types/module.go#L109-L133) interface. This means that the `IBCFeeKeeper` wraps the `IBCKeeper.ChannelKeeper` and that it can replace the use of the `ChannelKeeper` for sending packets, writing acknowledgements, and retrieving the IBC channel version.

Reviewer: super nice clarification on what this means!

We need to replace the `ChannelKeeper` with the `IBCFeeKeeper` in the `TransferKeeper`. To do this, we need to modify the `TransferKeeper` initialization in the `app.go` file.

```go title="app/app.go"
	// Create Transfer Keepers
	app.TransferKeeper = ibctransferkeeper.NewKeeper(
		appCodec,
		keys[ibctransfertypes.StoreKey],
		app.GetSubspace(ibctransfertypes.ModuleName),
		// minus-diff-line 
-		app.IBCKeeper.ChannelKeeper,
		// plus-diff-line 
+		app.IBCFeeKeeper,
		app.IBCKeeper.ChannelKeeper,
		&app.IBCKeeper.PortKeeper,
		app.AccountKeeper,
		app.BankKeeper,
		scopedTransferKeeper,
	)
```

### 2.2. Wire Up the ICS-29 Fee Middleware to the `TransferModule`

> Currently, the IBC Transfer stack does not exist in `app/app.go`. What we have are the transfer module (which is a Cosmos SDK module) and the transfer IBC module (which is an IBC application).

Reviewer: maybe something more like 

```suggestion
Currently, our `app/app.go` contains only the transfer module, which is a regular Cosmos SDK AppModule (that manages state and has its own messages) that also fulfills the IBC module interface and therefore has the ability to handle both channel handshake and packet lifecycle callbacks.
```

```go reference title="app/app.go"
https://github.com/srdtrk/cosmoverse2023-ibc-fee-demo/blob/0f41b3c6b4e065aa1a860de3e3038d489c37a28a/app/app.go#L457-L458
```

> Instead we need to "convert" the transfer IBC module to an IBC application stack that includes both the transfer IBC module and the ICS-29 Fee Middleware. Modify the `app.go` file as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We therefore need to "convert" the transfer IBC module to an IBC application stack that includes both the transfer IBC module and the ICS-29 Fee Middleware. Modify the `app.go` file as follows:
```
